Added the Vegetation Area System Component Reference doc (#1928)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/components/reference/vegetation/vegetation-area-system.md

---
linkTitle: Vegetation Area System
title: Vegetation Area System Component
description: The Vegetation Area System component handles the placement and removal of vegetation instances based on its configured rules in Open 3D Engine (O3DE).
---

The **Vegetation Area System** component handles the placement and removal of vegetation instances throughout your world, based on its configured rules.

Learn about how the Vegetation Area System component works within the vegetation system in [Technical details](#technical-details) below.

{{< note >}}

> This is a system component that exists when you interact with the vegetation system via the Vegetation Gem. Generally, this system is already set up and you don't need to do anything further to manage vegetation in your world.

Reviewer: The properties of the Area System and Instance System components seem more like defaults or project defaults, all of these properties are configurable per-level with the _level component_, Vegetation System Settings.  You might consider amending this note to point that out, and possibly link to docs for those components when they are added.

Author: Updated this, and updated it for Vegetation Instance system component. Pages for those don't exist yet so I didn't add a link.

Author: Also thank you, great call out, this is helpful to know!

{{< /note >}}

## Provider

[Vegetation Gem](/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/environment/vegetation/)

## Source code

[`/Gems/Vegetation/Code/Source/AreaSystemComponent.h`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/development/Gems/Vegetation/Code/Source/AreaSystemComponent.h)

## Parameters

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **View Area Grid Size** | The number of sectors (per-side) of a managed grid in a scrolling view centered around the camera | 1 to 128 | 13  |
| **Sector Point Density** | The number of equally spaced vegetation instance grid placement points (per-side) within a sector | 1 to 64 | 20 |
| **Sector Size In Meters** | The size in meters per-side of each sector. | 1 to 1024 | 16 |
| **Thread Processing Interval** | The delay in milliseconds between processing queued thread tasks. | 0 to 5000 | 500 |
| **Sector Search Padding** | Increases the search radius for surrounding sectors when enumerating through vegetation instances. | 0 to 2 | 0 |

> | **Sector Point Snap Mode** | Controls whether vegetation placement points are located at the corner or the center of the cell. | `Corner`, `Center` | `Center` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Sector Point Snap Mode** | Controls whether vegetation placement points are located at the corner or the center of the cell. | `Corner`, `Center` | `Corner` |
```
You should double-check this, in the _level component_, Vegetation System Settings, this defaults to `Corner`.

Author: Checks out in code too, thanks!

## AreaSystemRequestBus

File: [`Gem/sVegetation/Code/Include/Vegetation/Ebuses/AreaSystemRequestBus.h`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/5783c18cc8d65f75737159f4cdcf6019d0e8dcfc/Gems/Vegetation/Code/Include/Vegetation/Ebuses/AreaSystemRequestBus.h)

| Request Name | Description | Parameters | Return | Scriptable |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `RegisterArea` | Adds a Vegetation Area entity to the system for processing. | `AZ::EntityId`, `AZ::u32`, `AZ::Aabb&` | None | No  |
| `UnregisterArea` | Removes a Vegetation Area entity from the system. | `AZ::EntityId` | None | No  |

> | `RefreshArea` | Queues a Vegetation Area to update its data within the system and mark regions of sectors dirty for reprocessing. | `AZ::EntityId`, `AZ::u32`, `AZ::u32`, `AZ::Aabb&` | None | No  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `RefreshArea` | Queues a Vegetation Area to update its data within the system and marks regions of sectors dirty for reprocessing. | `AZ::EntityId`, `AZ::u32`, `AZ::u32`, `AZ::Aabb&` | None | No  |
```

| `RefreshAllAreas` | Updates the cached data for all registered areas and causes the entire system to repopulate. | None | None | No  |
| `ClearAllAreas` | Forces all cached data and instances in every sector to be removed, and causes the entire system to repopulate. | None | None | No  |
| `MuteArea` | Tells the Vegetation Area System to ignore the specified area when refilling sectors because it's managed elsewhere. This is the case with areas controlled by Vegetation Layer Blenders. | `AZ::EntityId` | None | No  |
| `UnmuteArea` | Re-enables direct processing of a Vegetation Area that was previously muted. | `AZ::EntityId` | None | No  |

> | `EnumerateInstancesInOverlappingSectors` | Visit all instances contained within every vegetation sector that overlaps the given bounds, until the callback function decides otherwise. Additionally, the sector boundary is by the **Sector Search Padding** value in the Area System component's configuration. | `AZ::Aabb&`, `AreaSystemEnumerateCallback` | None |     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `EnumerateInstancesInOverlappingSectors` | Visit all instances contained within every vegetation sector that overlaps the given bounds, until the callback function decides otherwise. Additionally, the sector boundary is by the **Sector Search Padding** value in the Area System component's configuration. | `AZ::Aabb&`, `AreaSystemEnumerateCallback` | None |  No  |
```

> | `EnumerateInstancesInOverlappingSectors` | Visit all instances contained within every vegetation sector that overlaps the given bounds, until the callback function decides otherwise. Additionally, the sector boundary is by the **Sector Search Padding** value in the Area System component's configuration. | `AZ::Aabb&`, `AreaSystemEnumerateCallback` | None |     |

Author: Incorporate both suggestions: 
```suggestion
| `EnumerateInstancesInOverlappingSectors` | Visits all instances contained within every vegetation sector that overlaps the given bounds, until the callback function decides otherwise. Additionally, the sector boundary is located by the **Sector Search Padding** value in the Area System component's configuration. | `AZ::Aabb&`, `AreaSystemEnumerateCallback` | None |  No |
```

| `EnumerateInstancesInAabb` | Invokes a callback function for every Vegetation Instance that intersects the specified bounds | `AZ::Aabb&`, `AreaSystemEnumerateCallback` | None | No  |

> | `GetInstanceCountInAabb` | Gets the current number of instances contained within the axis-aligned bounding box (AABB). | `AZ::Aabb&` | `AZStd::size_t` |     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `GetInstanceCountInAabb` | Gets the current number of instances contained within the axis-aligned bounding box (AABB). | `AZ::Aabb&` | `AZStd::size_t` | Yes |
```
These last two methods are reflected to the BehaviorContext under the AreaSystemRequestBus as a broadcast method rather than an event.

These samples represent all of the available points regarding where to plant vegetation.

When the camera moves or other events occur to modify the state of vegetation areas or surfaces, the Vegetation Area System component receives a notification. 
Then, it queues tasks for processing sectors and vegetation areas on another thread. 
Sectors that fall outside of the region are destroyed. 
New or remaining sectors within the region are evaluated to determine if they need to be filled.

Each sector that's being filled traverses all of the overlapping vegetation areas in priority order. 
Each vegetation area gets a list of the sector's available points, each of which it can examine and claim. 
If it does, it removes the point from circulation. 
When a vegetation area claims a point, no other vegetation areas can use it. 
A sector completes its processing when either there are no more available points or all vegetation areas are already processed.

For example, the **Vegetation Layer Spawner** component analyzes each point and determines if the point can be claimed based on its configuration, shape, and other filters. 

> If all is successful the Vegetation Layer Spawner will request to create a static object, or *vegetation instance*, at that location. 

Reviewer 3: "a static object" -> "an object"

> If all is successful the Vegetation Layer Spawner will request to create a static object, or *vegetation instance*, at that location. 

Author: Incorporate both suggestions:
```suggestion
If all is successful, the Vegetation Layer Spawner will request to create an object, or *vegetation instance*, at that location. 
```
